clinical therapeutics/volume 38, number 7, 2016review articlecurrent challenges in cancer treatmentjon zugazagoitia, md, phd1,2; cristiano guedes, md1; santiago ponce, md1,2;irene ferrer, phd2; sonia molina-pinelo, phd2; and luis paz-ares, md, phd1,21medical oncology department, hospital universitario 12 de octubre, madrid, spain; and2instituto deinvestigacio ni12. lung cancer clinical research unit cnio, i 12, madrid, spainabstractpurpose: in this review, we highlight the currentconcepts and discuss some of the current challengesand future prospects in cancer therapy. we frequentlyuse the example of lung cancer.methods: we conducted a nonsystematic pubmedsearch, selecting the most comprehensive and relevantresearch articles, clinical trials, translational papers, andreview articles on precision oncology and immuno-oncology. papers were prioritized and selected based ontheir originality and potential clinical applicability.findings: two major revolutions have changedcancer treatment paradigms in the past few years:targeting actionable alterations in oncogene-drivencancers and immuno-oncology. important challengesare still ongoing in both elds of cancer therapy. onthe one hand, druggable genomic alterations arediverse and represent only small subsets of patientsin certain tumor types, which limits testing theirclinical impact in biomarker-driven clinical trials.next-generation sequencing technologies are increas-ingly being implemented for molecular prescreening inclinical research, but issues regarding clinical interpre-tation of large genomic data make their wide clinicaluse dif cult. further, dealing with tumor heterogene-ity and acquired resistance is probably the mainlimitation for the success of precision oncology. onthe other hand, long-term survival bene ts withimmune checkpoint inhibitors (anti /c0programmeddeath cell protein-1/programmed death cell ligand-1[pd-1/l1] and anti /c0cytotoxic t lymphocyte antigen-4monoclonal antibodies) are restricted to a minority ofpatients, and no predictive markers are yet robustlyvalidated that could help us recognize these subsetsand optimize treatment delivery and selection. toachieve long-term survival bene ts, drug combina-tions targeting several molecular alterations or cancerhallmarks might be needed. this will probably be oneof the most challenging but promising precision cancertreatment strategies in the future.implications: targeting single molecular abnormal-ities or cancer pathways has achieved good clinicalresponses that have modestly affected survival in somecancers. however, this approach to cancer treatmentis still reductionist, and many challenges need to bemet to improve treatment outcomes with our patients.(clin ther. 2016;38:1551 1566) &2016 elsevier hsjournals, inc. all rights reserved.key words: cancer therapy, checkpoint inhibitors,drug development, immunotherapy, lung cancer, next-generation sequencing, precision oncology, targetedtherapy.introductioncancer is a major public health problem worldwide.global demographic characteristics predict anscan the qr code with your phone to obtainfree access to the articles featured in theclinical therapeutics topical updates or textgs2c65 to 64842. to scan qr codes yourphone must have a qr code reader installed.the basis for this article has been presented as a keynote lecture atthe 12th congress of the european association of clinical pharmacol-ogy and therapeutics in madrid, spain.accepted for publication march 17 , 2016.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.clinthera.2016.03.0260149-2918/$ - see front matter&2016 elsevier hs journals, inc. all rights reserved.july 2016 1551

increasing cancer incidence in the next decades, with420 million new cancer cases annually expected by2025. according to globocan data, 14.1 million newcases and 8.2 million deaths from cancer were estimatedin 2012.1cancers of the female breast, colorectal,prostate, and lung are the most frequently diagnosedcancers in europe.2lung cancer remains the leadingcause of cancer incidence and mortality worldwide.1the increasing knowledge of molecular and tumorbiology has notably changed cancer treatment para-digms during the past 15 years. formerly, cancer wasclassi ed and treated solely according to organs oforigin or simplistic histomorphologic features. in aseminal paper published by schiller et al3in 2002,completely overlapping survival curves were found inadvanced non /c0small-cell lung cancer (nsclc)patients after use of 4 different platinum-based che-motherapy doublets with third-generation drugs. eventhough the trial was limited to lung cancer, it foundthat cancer treatment based on a broad use ofcytotoxic chemotherapies in unselected patients hadreached its therapeutic plateau. in addition, it becameclear that the development of molecularly targeted thera-pies and treatment selection based on particular molecularalterations was needed. since then, 2 pillars have driventhe subsequent evolution of cancer treatment: new tech-nology acquisition for tumor molecular pro ling and thediscovery of predictive molecular targets. together, theseefforts have materialized the 2 recent revolutions in cancertreatment. first, genotype- directed precision oncology,that is, tailoring personalized therapies to subsets harbor-ing speci c genomic abnormalities across different tumortypes. second, targeting components of the tumor micro-environment, in particular the immune system and theantitumor immunity. in this review, we will succinctlydescribe the fundamental premises of these 2 anticancerstrategies. we will also highlight some of the majorchallenges ahead in both elds of cancer treatment,frequently using the example of lung cancer.methodswe did a nonsystematic review of current concepts inprecision oncology. references for this review wereidenti ed through searches of pubmed using the termsprecision oncology (8301 results; 313 clinical trials),oncogene addiction or targeted therapies (102,601results; 4883 clinical trials), next-generation sequencingorearly drug development (69,901 results; 2201 clinicaltrials), immunotherapy orimmuno-oncology (255,507results; 14,081 clinical trials), immune checkpoint inhib-itorsorpd-1/l1 blockade (769 results; 17 clinical trials),andnon/c0small-cell lung cancer. articles were selectedmainly on the basis of their clinical applicability, and weprioritized for practice-chan ging clinical studies, sometranslational papers, and sel ected comprehensive reviewspublished in the last 5 years. relevant articles were alsoidenti ed through searches of the authors les and whenreviewing other papers and the ir respective bibliographies.unpublished reports from scienti c conferences wereidenti ed across meeting libraries and abstract books.only articles published in english were included. all of thereferences cited in this article were reviewed. the nalreference list was generated on the basis of originality andrelevance to the broad scope of this review.targeting actionable alterations inoncogene-driven cancersthe essential premise of genotype-based precisiononcology is that tumor-speci c molecular abnormal-ities can be targeted with accurate, effective, andpotentially less-toxic therapies. extensive preclinicalwork and primary discoveries of somatic, single-genegenomic abnormalities that could be pharmacologi-cally targeted opened the rst gateways for genomicprecision oncology. more recently, comprehensiveand integrative characterization of many cancers usinghigh-throughput technologies under the auspices ofnational (eg, the cancer genome atlas, funded by thenational cancer institute and national human ge-nome research institute in the united states) orinternational (eg, international cancer genome con-sortium) efforts, has led both to a new era of genomicor molecular taxonomy of cancer and to the discoveryof cancer genes and biomarkers for therapy.4there are 3 crucial issues for successful clinicalbiomarker development: biologic plausibility (theidenti ed genomic alteration is responsible for malig-nant transformation and tumor progression), analyt-ical validity (it can be detected with robust, reliable,and clinically applicable genomic tests), and clinicalvalidity (the prognostic or predictive utility of thebiomarker has been validated in clinical trials andcommunity-based clinical cohorts). at the same time,it must be emphasized that clinical biomarkers mighthave diagnostic, prognostic, predictive, or pharmaco-genomic utilities.5predictive biomarkers are the mostclinical therapeutics1552 volume 38 number 7

useful markers in daily practice, as they simulta-neously enable both selection of subsets that will obtainthe greatest bene ts from a certain treatment andexclusion of those who will not bene t from therapy.prognostic markers, however, are informative of patientoutcomes irrespective of treatment, and are therefore lessfrequently used in the clinic for treatment decisions.nsclc is one example that illustrates the para-digms of genomics precision oncology. from theinitial one size ts all described in the study by schilleret al,3shortly after 3 research groups found that thepresence of mutations in the tyrosine kinase domainofegfr gene ( egfr -activating mutations in exons18/c021) conferred sensitivity to egfr tyrosine kinaseinhibitors (tkis).6,7,8subsequently, a landmarktrial was initiated enrolling metastatic pulmonaryadenocarcinoma patients enriched for the existenceofegfr mutations (asiatic, never or light smokers)who were randomly assigned to receive rst-linechemotherapy or an egfr tki (ge tinib). a signi -cant treatment interaction ( po0.0001) was foundbetween egfr mutation status and treatment arm, sothat egfr mutation /c0positive patients selectivelybeneted from ge tinib in terms of progression-freesurvival (pfs) (n 261; hazard ratio [hr] 0.48;95% ci, 0.36 /c00.64; po0.0001) compared withegfr mutation /c0negative patient (n 176;hr2.85; 95% ci, 2.05 /c03.98; po0.0001),underscoring the predictive effect of egfr -activatingmutations for the bene t of egfr tkis.9this predictive bene t in terms of response rates(rrs) and pfs has been con rmed in at least6 molecularly selected (patients with egfr mutation /c0positive tumors) randomized trials, including cauca-sian populations.10alk gene fusions have undergonesimilar preclinical and clinical validation and, togetherwith ros-1 rearrangements, are both well-establishedpredictors for the bene t of alk-ros-1 tkis.11,12other targetable oncogenes, whose clinical data comefrom smaller cohorts or early clinical trials, includeb-raf andher2 mutations, and met ampli cations,which, with an approximate 40% rr with tailoredtherapies, are formally recognized as predictive targetsin nsclc. finally, there are other oncogenic driverswhose targeted inhibition has shown encouragingresults in preclinical models and clinical responses infew case series. these targets are currently being morewidely studied in clinical trials, including, amongothers, met mutations (exon 14 skipping), ret,and ntrk1, 2, 3 rearrangements, fgfr1, 2, 3ampli cations or mutations, and ddr2 mutations(the last 2 predominantly in squamous cell carcino-mas)13(table i ). importantly, using multiplexedgenomic testing, druggable genomic targets (inclu-ding egfr, alk, ros-1, braf, her2, met,ret, pik3ca genomic alterations) were identi ed inup to 64% of the samples within a large multicentercohort of lung adenocarcinoma p atients. those patientsreceiving appropriate matche d therapies achieved longersurvival compared with those with driver alterations butnot receiving targeted therapies or those withoutoncogenic aberrations susceptible of speci ctreatment.14finally, integrative and comprehensivemolecular characterizations of both adenocarcinomasand squamous cell carcinomas have already beenpublished, and it is thought that a genomics-basedclassi cation of human lung tumors will become a realityin the near future.15of course, oncogene-targetedtherapies have been successful for treating other subsetsof solid tumors apart from nsclc4,16(table i ).three important issues must be pointed out regard-ing oncogene-targeted therapies. first, most of theseexamples illustrate the key concept of oncogeneaddiction. in these tumor models, a single drivermutation confers distinct biologic properties and iscapable of driving the main oncogenic capabilities sotumor cells become strongly dependent on that speci cgenomic alteration for survival.17second, thesegenomic drivers represent small subsets of patientsacross different solid tumors.4,16and third, the vastmajority of genomic alterations that are clinicallyvalidated as predictive markers are genes encodingfor molecules involved in pathways related tosustained proliferation or apoptosis inhibition18(table i ). one possible exception is the tumorcarrying trunk mutations in genes involved in dnarepair mechanisms. for instance, germ-line brca1, 2mutations have been successfully validated as predic-tive markers for the bene t of poly adp ribosepolymerase inhibitors (which are synthetic lethal inthe presence of homologous repair de ciency) inadvanced, high-grade, serous ovarian carcinomas.19,20cancer immunotherapythe longstanding hypothesis of cancer immunoeditingis now recognized as a core process of tumorigenesis.it is well known that many solid tumors arej. zugazagoitia et al.july 2016 1553

table i. oncogene addicted tumors and matched targeted therapies.tumor typeand gene genomic alterationprevalence,%selected drugs with available clinicaldata in molecularly selected patientsresponserate, %nsclcegfr activating mutations 10 /c015 ge tinib, erlotinib, afatinib,dacomitinib, ng egfr tki50/c070*alk gene rearrangements 2 /c05 crizotinib, ng alk tki50/c070*ros-1 gene rearrangements 1 /c02*crizotinib, ng ros1 tki 50 /c070*her2 activating mutations 1 /c02 afatinib, dacomitinib, neratinib,trastuzumab20/c040braf activating mutations 1 /c02 vemurafenib, dabrafenib40met ampli cation and pointmutation1/c05||crizotinib, cabozantinib, inc28030/c040ret gene rearrangements 1 /c03 cabozantinib, vandetanib,sunitinib, sorafenib/c0ntrk1, 2, 3 gene rearrangements 1 /c03 entrectinib, loxo-101/c0fgfr1, 2, 3ampli cation andactivating mutations5/c020 bgj398, azd4547/c0ddr2activating mutations 1 /c03 dasatinib/c0melanoma 50/c065braf activating mutation (v600) 60 vemurafenib, dabrafenib trametinib#breast cancerhr overexpression 60 hormonal therapies**50/c070her2 ampli cation 20 trastuzumab, pertuzumab, lapatinib 80prostate cancer 70 hormonal therapiesar overexpression,ampli cationabiraterone,enzalutamide50/c070gastric cancerher2 ampli cation 20 trastuzumab 40 /c050gistc-kit andpdgfractivating mutations 80 imatinib 50 /c085arandrogen receptor; gist gastrointestinal stromal tumor; hr hormonal therapies; inh inhibitors; ng nextgeneration; tki tyrosine kinase inhibitors.*data correspond to caucasian populations.||de novo. met ampli cation might occur in up to 10% of egfr-acquired resistance.predominantly mutated in squamous-cell lung carcinomas.including osimertinib and rociletinib.including alectinib and ceritinib.not approved drugs.#trametinib is a mek inhibitor.**including lhrh agonists, tamoxifen, aromatase inhibitors.including lhrh agonists, bicalutamide.castration-resistant prostate cancer.lower responses for castration-resistant prostate cancers.clinical therapeutics1554 volume 38 number 7

immunogenic.21during malignant transformation, non-self, tumor-associated antig ens or neoepitopes resultingfrom gene mutations are created, which can be recog-nized by the immune system. this process is calledimmune surveillance. at least initially, adaptive, tumorantigen /c0specic t-cell responses are generated, leadingto cancer-cell elimination.21,22,23several steps arerecognized in this anti-tumor immune response that havebeen comprehensively depicted in a seminal review bychen and mellman,24commonly known as the cancerimmunity cycle. however, it is clear that tumors nallyescape from immune attack, despite functional immunesystems. incomplete tumor elimination is followed by anequilibrium phase, in which cancer cells shape theirmicroenvironment and initiate complex mechanisms ofimmune evasion that will nally lead to immune escapeand tumor progression.21,25actually, immune evasion isconsidered one of the core hallmarks of cancer18and,importantly, targeting thes e immune-suppressive mecha-nisms is revolutionizing cancer treatment. cancer cellscan generate immune-suppressi ve networks in every stepof the cancer immunity cycle. thus, tumors can disruptthe generation of tumor-reactive t cells (defective den-dritic cell maturation and ac tivation, defective t-cellactivation), t-cell traf cking (immune-suppressive che-mokine milieu) or t-cell cross of the tumor vasculature(tumor endothelium is both a physical barrier for t cellsand an active immune suppressor by generation ofangiogenic (eg, vascular endothelial growth factor) andimmunosuppressive factors (eg, prostaglandin e2, indole-amine 2,3-dioxygenase, tim-3, and pd/l1-2). for thoset cells that manage to home the tumor, they reach animmune-suppressive local t umor microenvironment do-minated by tumor-associated immune-suppressive leuko-cytes (regulatory t cells, myeloid-derived suppressorcells), and a number of soluble immunosuppressivemolecules (generated mainly by these cells, which includetransforming growth factor /c0, interleukin-10, adeno-sine, and indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase, among manymore), that prevent the encounter with their tumor-antigen target or suppress their immune functions.finally, cancer cells can evade the nal step of immuneattack and immune rejection by avoiding antigen recog-nition (eg, downregulation o f major histocompatibilitycomplex class i molecules) or, for instance, by upregulat-ing a number of membrane receptors that induceapoptotic signals in t cells (fasl and tumor necrosisfactor/c0related apoptosis-inducing ligand) or immunetolerance (pd/l1 /c02).24,25immune-suppressive inhibitory checkpoint mole-cules generated upon t-cell activation that regulatethe immunologic synapse between t cells and den-dritic cells in lymph nodes (eg, cytotoxic t lymphocyteantigen-4 and b7.1), modulating t-cell activation; orbetween t cells and tumor cells in the tumor bed (eg,pd-1/l1 /c02), modulating immune rejection or theeffector phase, are among the most relevant targetsfor immunotherapy.26-28monoclonal antibodiesblocking cytotoxic t lymphocyte antigen-4 and pd-1/l1 receptors have yielded clinical bene ts in severaltumor types and, contrary to classic cytotoxic chemo-therapy or even targeted therapy, they provide dura-ble, long-term survival bene ts. particularly appealingclinical results have been reported with pd-1/l1blockers and treatment paradigms have changed inan increasing list of solid tumors, particularly mela-noma, nsclc, or kidney cancer27-29(table ii ). thelong-term overall survival (os) bene t achieved withnivolumab compared with standard second-line che-motherapy in advanced nsclc is an example of thisencouraging clinical ef cacy. in the checkmate 017trial, 272 advanced, previously treated, squamous-celllung cancer patients were randomly assigned toreceive nivolumab (n 135) or docetaxel (n 137).the patients who received nivolumab had a 3-monthimprovement in os (hr 0.59; 95% ci, 0.44 /c00.79;p0.00025), and 1-year survival rates were 42%compared with 24%. there was also a treatment bene tin terms of rr and pfs in favor of nivolumab.30with asimilar study design, the checkmate 057 trial con rmedthe os improvement in the non /c0squamous-cell lungcancer subsets (12.2 months v s 9.7 months, respectively;hr0.73; 95% ci, 0.59 /c00.89; p0.002).intriguingly, median pfs did not favor nivolumab (2.3months vs 4.3 months, respectively),31which underscoresthe paradigm shift of immunotherapy compared withother anticancer drugs relative to its long-term survivalbenets.remarkably, pd-1/l1 blockers have a better tox-icity pro le than conventional chemotherapy.29whileimmune-related adverse events might be relativelyfrequent, they are mostly mild and can be wellmanaged with adequate training. apart from immunecheckpoint inhibitors, many other important immune-based therapies are being developed, which can bepractically classi ed into active or passive immuno-therapies according to the implication of host simmunity when eliciting anti-tumor responses.j. zugazagoitia et al.july 2016 1555

table ii. practice changing phase ii /c0iii randomized trials with anti /c0cytotoxic t lymphocyte antigen-4 and anti pd-1/l1 agents in solid tumors.agent tumor typetreatmentscenario phase control arm response rate median osstudy firstauthorpd-1/l1 nivolumab melanoma first line iii dacarbazine 40% vs 13.9% nre vs 10.8 mo robert6473% vs 42% 1-y osnsclc pretreated*iii ic-ct 32% vs 11% nr weber63squamous pretreated iii docetaxel 20% vs 9% 9.2 mo vs 7.3 mo brahmer30non-squamous pretreated iii docetaxel 19% vs 12% 12.2 mo vs 9.4 mo borghaei31rcc pretreated iii everolimus 25% vs 5% 25 mo vs 19.6 mo motzer61pembrolizumab melanoma pretreated*ii ic-ct 25% vs 4% nr ribas68first line iii ipilimumab 33.7% vs 11.9% nr in any group74.1% vs 58.2% 1-yosrobert69nsclc pretreated iii docetaxel 18% vs 9% 12.7 mo vs 8.5 mo herbst70,ctla4 ipilimumab melanoma pretreated iii gp100 10.9 mo vs 1.5mo10 mo vs 6.4 mo hodi71first lineiii dacarbazine 15.2% vs 10.3% 11.2 mo vs 9.1 mo robert72nivolumab ipilimumabmelanoma first line iii ipilimumab 61% vs 11% nr postow73first line iii monotherapy57.6% vs 43.7% vs19 %nr larkin74ic-ctinvestigator s choice chemotherapy; os overall survival; nsclc non/c0small-cell lung cancer; nr not reported; nre not reached; rcc renal-cellcarcinoma.*progressed after ipilimumab, or ipilimumab and a braf inhibitor if they were braf (v 600) mutation-positive.large international phase i trial leading to pembrolizumab approval in nsclc. among pd-l1 patients ( z50%), response rate 45.2% and median os notreached.the experimental arm consisted in ipilimumab dacarbazine.nivolumab and ipilimumab, respectively.clinical therapeutics1556 volume 38 number 7

active immunotherapies (which include immunecheckpoint modulators) depend on the host s capa-bility of mounting a t-cell /c0based antitumor attack.contrary, passive immunotherapies, such as adoptivet-cell therapy, are those strategies that contain in-trinsic anti-tumor properties.32immunostimulatoryantibodies against activatory checkpoint receptors(eg, anti-cd137 or anti-cd40, among others) arepromising targets for anticancer immunotherapy andare being tested in clinical trials.33cancer vaccines are by far the most studied activeimmunotherapies in the clinic across a wide variety oftumor types, with mostly discouraging results.34,35polyvalent, cell-based cancer vaccines (eg, dendriticcell or tumor-cell vaccines) containing a wide range oftumor-associated antigens are promising, but are notwithout technical dif culties for clinical applicability.there are comprehensive reviews in the eld, whichwe recommend for interested readers.36as far aspassive immunotherapies are concerned, adoptivet-cell therapy is among the most exciting anticancerimmunotherapy. early experiences in acute lympho-blastic leukemia have shown encouraging clinicalefcacy results that merit further study in larger trialsand other solid tumors.37,38challenges ahead in precisiononcologyclinical implementation of next-generationsequencing technologiesas stated previously, predictive genomic abnormal-ities are uncommon, diverse in nature, and distributedacross many tumor types. these premises, togetherwith the increasing number of predictive mutations ineach tumor type, force the requirement of compre-hensive, multiplexed, and highly sensitive sequencingtechniques for routine clinical care.4,5classic sanger sequencing does not ful ll thesecriteria and is de nitely not cost-effective, as it lacksenough sensitivity, cannot test multiple genomic mu-tations simultaneously, and is unable to detect ge-nomic abnormalities other than point mutations orsmall insertions or deletions.39to meet theserequirements, high-throughput next-generation se-quencing (ngs) technologies have been developed.5two next-generation molecular diagnostics can bedistinguished: customized gene panels and wholeexome and genome or transcriptome panels. genepanels are thought to detect multiple potentiallyrelevant mutations across several cancer genes(n20/c0300) at once, with suf cient scalability forclinical requirements. ngs gene panels can be eitherpolymerase chain reaction (pcr) amplicon-basedor hybrid capture-based. each assay has its ownadvantages and disadvantages for routine clinicalapplication. because pcr amplicon-based panels relyon pcr ampli cation of commonly mutated exons ofcandidate genes before massively parallel sequencing,they are subject to limitations inherent to pcr dnaampli cation (eg, false-positive results due topolymerase-induced artifacts in formalin- xed paraf-n-embedded tissue samples or false-negative resultsin samples with low tumor dna input). in addition,their predominant applications include the identi ca-tion of point mutations and deletions, so they need tobe commonly combined with other techniques, suchus immunochemistry of uorescence in situ hybrid-ization in order to cover a wider spectrum of pre-dictive genomic abnormalities (eg, copy numbervariations or gene rearrangements).5,39on the contrary, hybrid capture-based panels do notrequire amplicon generation and can reliably detect copynumber variations and gene rea rrangements, but demandmore complex computational infrastructure.39severalcustomized gene panels are c ommercially available forclinical laboratory improvement amendment /c0certiedlaboratories and are increasingly being used in manyacademic centers for routine g enotyping and patient care.these early clinical expe riences have found thatcustomized gene panel genot yping is not only feasibleand adaptable to the limitati ons and challenges inherent toclinical settings (frequent lim ited biopsy tissue available,low tumor cellularity, formalin- xed paraf n-embeddedtissue samples, or rapid tur naround time required fortherapeutic decisions, among others),40but is also clinicallyuseful for routine cancer care or patient prompt selectionfor biomarker-driven e arly clinical trials.41,42however, atleast for the moment, these experiences have been limitedto large academic centers and are not yet widely availablefor the entire oncology community.whole exome and genome or rna sequencing plat-forms are rarely used for routine clinical genotyping andare mostly used for research purposes. several issues limittheir clinical applicability. the rst issue is the manage-ment of massive amounts of genomic datasets thatrequire complex bioinformatics for proper data analysis,which, at least for the moment, is not compatible withj. zugazagoitia et al.july 2016 1557

the short timeframe needed for therapeutic decisionmaking. the second issue is the dif culty clinicallyinterpreting the high quantity of noninformative, un-known signi cance genomic data that they generate. thethird issue is the economic cost.39,40whichever ngs platform is used, clinical interpretationof the genomic results is de nitely one of the mostimportant challenges for the wide clinical applicability ofngs technologies. we highlight 3 characteristics thataffect the clinical relevan ce of a particular genomicabnormality: functional impact (biological relevance),clinical effects, and targetability. mutations affectinghotspot regions of biologically relevant cancer genes are,in general, functionally important, clinically relevant, andmostly targetable ( driver mutations ), but this function-ality might be inherent to particular tumor types. how-ever, it might be dif cult to determine whether non-hotspot, previously undescribed or unknown signi cantmutations in biologically relevant genes are true driversthat can match with effective drugs, or are insteadfunctionally or clinically irrelevant passenger muta-tions. 39,43this situation might be frequent in carcinogen-induced tumors carrying high mutational loads, such asmelanoma or lung cancer. in addition, clinical diagnosticngs adds further complexity because matched germlinedna is usually unavailable and the risk of falselyconsidering a rare polymorphic variant as a potentialcandidate driver cannot be excluded.39several publicallyavailable databases and levels of evidence have beenproposed in order to determine the clinical signi canceand actionability of genetic abnormalities.43what isevident is that expert multidisciplinary teams, includingpathologists, molecular biologists, geneticists, bioinfor-matics, and oncologists, are needed for adequate dataanalysis, interpretation, and t herapeutic decision guidingin the clinic.conducting biomarker-driven clinical trialsthe low mutation frequency of some genomicabnormalities, together with their wide distributionacross many tumor types, raise major challenges whentesting the clinical impact of precision cancer medi-cine. designs of genotype-enriched clinical trials canbe classi edrst according to whether they arehistology-based or not. basket trials are histology-independent, as they include patients with differenttumors harboring a common genomic abnormality toreceive a matched therapy within the framework of aphase i /c0ii trial.44as an example, an important phase iibasket trial for braf v600 mutant nonmelanomacancers was published recently.45notably, one of thekey ndings of this trial is that the oncogenicproperties and subsequent clinical targetability ofgenomic drivers are dependent on speci c tumortypes. as such, in this trial, encouraging activity innsclc subsets receiving vemurafenib (rr 43%)was found, but not in other tumor types, such ascolorectal cancers, anaplastic thyroid cancers,cholangiocarcinomas, or ovarian cancers.45on theother hand, histology-dependent umbrella trials restrict the inclusion criteria to a particular tumortype, and eligible patients are genotyped for multiplemutations that match with different drugs. these trialsfrequently incorporate randomization strategies (ei-ther biomarker-positive patients only or allbiomarker-positive and negative patients) to includea control arm where patients receive nontargetedtherapy in order to assess the prognostic or predict-ability of the biomarker in question.44examplesinclude the i-spy 2 (investigation of serial studies topredict your therapeutic response with imaging andmolecular analysis 2; clinicaltrials.gov id:nct01042379) and safir-01 (high throughputtechnologies to drive breast cancer patients tospeci c phase i /c0ii trials of targeted agents; clin-icaltrials.gov id: nct01414933) trials in breastcancer or master protocol (a biomarker-drivenmaster protocol for previously treated squamouscell lung cancer [lung-map]; clinicaltrials.govid: nct02154490), and alchemist (adjuvantlung cancer enrichment marker identi cationand sequencing trial; clinicaltrials.gov id:nct02194738) trials in lung cancer.43anotherstrategy, which can be applied to basket or umbrellatrials, is to randomly assign genotype-selected patientsto molecularly tailored therapies versus conventionaltherapies instead of to speci c drugs.44therecently reported, histology-agnostic, french shiva(a randomized proof-of-concept phase ii trial com-paring therapy based on tumor molecular pro lingversus conventional therapy in patients with re-fractory cancer) study is one example of these trials.46finally, another different strategy to investigate theclinical value of personalized therapy is the n-of-1 trial design, which compares, within each patient, theclinical outcome of a mutation-tailored therapyagainst the most recent nontargeted regimen.44theinternational winther trial (a study to selectclinical therapeutics1558 volume 38 number 7

rational therapeutics based on the analysis ofmatched tumor and normal biopsies in subjectswith advanced malignancies; clinicaltrials.gov id:nct01856296) is genomically and transcriptomicallycharacterizing different tum or types across 6 countries tocompare pfs rates between targeted versus most recentuntargeted therapy with a modi ed n-of-1 design.47all of these trial designs mentioned are mostlythought to investigate early signals of activity of amatched targeted therapy. new adaptive statisticaldesigns or end points (eg, disease control rate at8 weeks or early tumor shrinkage) are being increasinglyused in order to optimize this proof-of-concept proc-ess.44importantly, multicenter collaborative networksare essential to facilitate molecular prescreening(comprehensive molecular pro ling) and subsequentpatient selection for these clinical trials.4besides thechallenge, there are 2 other main issues that may limitnew molecularly guided drug development. the rst istarget prioritization for trial eligibility.43as statedpreviously, misclassi cation of driver and passenger mutations can result in false-negative results, with theconsequent drug rejection or exclusion of potentialcandidates that could truly bene t from therapy. thesecond issue is tumor molecular heterogeneity. cur-rent practice assumes that a one-site, single-tumorbiopsy is representative of the whole tumor genomicburden of the patient, underestimating the existence ofintratumor heterogeneity. while driver mutationsusually dominate all metastatic sites and this hetero-geneity especially affects subclonal, probably passen-ger mutations, increasing knowledge of tumor clonalevolution highlights the fact that subclonal popula-tions might affect the growth of clonally dominantcells, and are also responsible for acquired oncogeneresistance.43therefore, next-generation clinical trialsthat take into account the premise of tumor hetero-geneity are being developed.48finally, when positivesignals from the early clinical trials mentioned areapparent, they usually need con rmation in larger,preferably phase iii randomized trials in order to getthe drug approved for clinical use. conducting large,phase iii randomized studies in molecularly selectedcohorts with mutations that hardly represent 1% to5% of overall cases might take several years, or evenbe unfeasible in some rare tumor types. accelerateddrug approvals are sometimes granted by theregulatory authorities when there is a strongbiomarker or drug matching that translates intostrong clinical ef cacy.44actually, the need forrandomized controlled trials in this setting is amatter of unresolved debate in the oncologycommunity.tumor heterogeneity and resistanceduring cancer development, tumors acquire so-matic mutations in an evolutionary darwininanmodel. cells that acquire certain mutations gainsurvival advantage and dominate localized tumorareas by displacing those lacking these genomic alter-ations. this process is enhanced by consecutive clonalexpansions. according to this model, all cells within atumor would be biologically similar, and thus equallysusceptible to acquiring mutations and spawning newsubclones. however, several lines of evidence indicatethat tumor initiation and progression could rely on arelatively minor population of self-renewing cancerstem cells. these cancer stem cells would be theancestors of a much larger population of more differ-entiated cells with limited proliferative capacity. tofurther complicate this picture, the following cancerstem cell models for tumor initiation and progressionhave been proposed: the strictly hierarchical model, inwhich cancer stem cells are a biologically distinctpopulation within the tumor and the only ones withself-renewing and tumorigenic potential; and the non-hierarchical model, where potentially every tumor cell(particularly the transit-amplifying or progenitor cells,ie, the daughters of cancer stem cells) have plasticityand the potential ability to de-differentiate and re-enter the stem cell state in response to intrinsic ormicroenvironmental factors.49darwinian and cancerstem cell models are not mutually exclusive, as theystill rely on linear clonal successions. however, theyare still oversimplistic because, if true, homogeneousclones would dominate tumor masses. instead, tumorprogression is accelerated by the progressive genomicinstability inherent in cancer cells or exogenouscarcinogens (eg, sunburn and smoking), whichincrease the generation of new mutations, probablyexceeding darwinian selection.18in turn, the course of tumor progression, ratherthan being linear, occurs as a branched model, withtumor masses composed of increasing numbersof genetically distinct subclones. actually, severalhigh-throughput whole-genome sequencing studiesacross different tumor types have reported this, reveal-ing high genomic variability within primary tumorsj. zugazagoitia et al.july 2016 1559

and metastatic regions.50in a breakthrough article,integrative genomic characterization of multipleprimary and metastatic lesions of 2 renal-cell carcino-mas found that there was genomic, transcriptomic, andfunctional heterogeneity within separate tumor sites,resulting in different tumor subclones. in addition,25% to 50% of the detected mutations were private(tumor regions not detected in order).51this high level of intratumor heterogeneity has alsobeen con rmed in other tumor types, including lungcancer. multiregion whole-exome sequencing in 11localized adenocarcinomas did reveal high levels ofintratumor heterogeneity but, importantly, the major-ity of mutations (76%) were present in all tumorsregions, and most of the driver mutations tended to betruncal, occurring early in tumorigenesis.52this wasalso found in the study by gerlinger et al51and similarreports in other solid tumors that suggest that despitehigh levels of tumor heterogeneity, recurrent targetsand driver mutations are dominant and present inevery tumor clone and tumor region, representingrobust therapeutic targets.50this means that asingle-site biopsy would be suf cient to detect thosedriver mutations that can match with their respectivetargeted therapies or, in other words, there is no needto perform multiple biopsies and check for hetero-geneity for therapeutic decisions in this setting. how-ever, increasing evidence suggests that some subclonalpopulations may support the growth and survival ofneighboring, clonally dominant cells, turning someregions more aggressive than others. in addition,subclonal populations and branched clonal evolutionare partly responsible for drug resistance.43tumor heterogeneity, together the emergence ofresistant clones on drug pressure (clonal evolution) aredenitely the main challenges for the success ofprecision oncology, as they are both closely relatedand explain the therapeutic failures in clinical practice.in the case of solid tumors, lung cancer has served asthe main source to study acquired resistance to tkisin oncogene-addicted tumors. actually, the geneticbasis and some clinically relevant mechanisms ofacquired resistance in egfr- or alk-mutant lungcancers have been characterized, enabling the develop-ment of selective drugs to overcome resistant clones.53this has been done either by studying clinical samples(re-biopsies taken from patients on tkis at diseaseprogression)54or in experimental models.55ingeneral, mechanisms of acquired resistance can bedivided in 3 groups: those that imply second genomicalterations in the drug target (eg, secondary mutationsin the tki domain of egfr or alk), thosethat reactivate the same pathway (eg, mek mutationin braf-mutant melanoma treated with brafinhibitors) or those involving activation of bypasstrack signaling pathways.53nongenomic alterations(transcriptional and epigenetic changes) andintratumoral immunity have been described as othersources of acquired resistance to targeted therapy, butthese mechanisms are less well established.56amongtherst group, egfr t790m mutations (exon 20)are detected in up to 60% of patients with acquiredresistance to egfr tkis.57targeted therapy againstthis secondary genomic event with third-generationegfr tkis (osimertinib or rociletinib) has changedthe natural history of resistant egfr disease, with60% rr and preliminary 10-month median pfs int790m subsets.58,59as far as the second group isconcerned, functional activation of ras-raf-mek-erk pathway represents probably the most importantbypass track leading to acquired resistance, bothin egfr and alk-mutant lung cancers.57,60combination strategies targeting bypass tracks haveshown encouraging results in experimental models,55and are currently being investigated in clinical trials.importantly, using these combinations as upfronttreatments may delay the emergence of acquiredresistance or turn tumors less aggressive orheterogeneous upon disease progression.with all of this in mind, it is evident that repeatedbiopsies at progression are needed to determineresistant mechanisms and their potential targetedinhibition. this can be a challenge in routine clinicalpractice, as it might result in increased morbidity or beunfeasible in certain cases.16genomic analysis ofcirculating tumor cells or circulating-free dna(liquid biopsies ) could potentially minimize theseissues, and these platforms are being developed inongoing studies in the resistance setting and next-generation biomarker-driven clinical trials.43otheradvantages include the possibility of optimalgenotyping in the absence of adequate tumor tissueand monitoring the molecular evolution while patientsare on treatment.61finally, in order to avoid or delaythe emergence of more aggressive mechanisms ofresistance, next-generation targeted therapies (third-generation tki monotherapies and potentially combi-nations) are being investigated as rst-line treatmentsclinical therapeutics1560 volume 38 number 7

rather than therapies upon disease progression inegfr- and alk-mutant lung cancers. liquid biopsiescould be helpful to characterize the level of tumorheterogeneity in these patients, thus enabling theselection of potentially personalized upfront therapiesin combination. it remains to be seen whether theseblood-based genomic pro ling or other approaches toface heterogeneity and monitor resistance will bescalable for clinical purposes. table iii details themost important challenges of genomics precisioncancer medicine.predictive markers for immunotherapy andprecision immuno-oncologypd-1/l1 blockade has represented a real break-through in cancer treatment. however, long-term sur-vival bene ts are achieved only in a small fraction ofpatients (10% /c020%). deciphering what characterizesthese subsets and developing molecular biomarkers thatcan help us identify which patients will obtain largertreatment bene ts and thus optimize treatment selectionis probably the main challenge in the eld of cancerimmunotherapy currently. expression of pd-l1 as-sessed by immunochemistry has been the most studiedmarker in this regard, and its potential predictivecapacity has been analyzed in most of the randomizedcontrolled trials investigating the role of pd-1/l1 block-ers. however, the predictive role of pd-l1 expression isfar from being clari ed at the moment.evidence across different tumor types suggests thatalthough the higher tumor pd-l1 expression thebetter rr and survival rate, treatment bene ts arenot necessarily restricted to pd-l1 /c0positive subsets.62in metastatic melanoma, 2 nivolumab pivotal trialsreported that approximately 20% to 30% of pd-l1/c0negative patients responded, as compared with50% of pd-l1 /c0positive subsets.63,64importantly,improved os was reported with nivolumabcompared with dacarbazine for pd-l1 /c0negativepatients in the checkmate 066 trial (1-year ostable iii. premises and challenges for genomics precision oncology.premise clinical requirements main challenges aheaddiverse and increasing number ofpredictive genomic abnormalitiesacross tumor typesimplementing next-generationsequencing technologies forroutine caretechnical issuesmanaging large amountsof genomic datasetsclinical interpretation ofthe genomic dataeconomic costs andaccessibilitylow prevalence of some genomicabnormalities and widelydistributed across many tumortypesbiomarker-driven trial designs totest their clinical impactlarge, multi-institutionalefforts requiredlong recruitment period;time and costsoptimizing molecularprescreening methods andtiming for patient selectiontarget prioritizationtumor heterogeneitytumor heterogeneity liquid biopsies and next-generationclinical trialsrobust assay developmentclinical translation forroutine careemergence of acquiredresistancenext-generation drugs targeting resistantclones and combinatorial strategies(upfront or at disease progression)emerging toxicities andtolerabilityj. zugazagoitia et al.july 2016 1561

67.8% vs 37.4%, respectively).64in patients withsquamous-cell nsclc and renal-cell carcinomatreated with nivolumab, rrs and os improvedirrespective of pd-l1 expression.30,65however, innon-squamous nsclc, a strong predictive effect forpd-l1 expression was suggested. for the pd-l1/c0positive subgroup, os was doubled in favor ofnivolumab (17.2 months compared with 9 monthswith docetaxel; hr 0.59; 95% ci, 0.43 /c00.82).however, no differences were observed between nivo-lumab and docetaxel in pd-l1 /c0negative tumors (10.4months vs 10.1 months, respectively; hr 0.90; 95ci, 0.66 /c01.24; pvalue for interaction o0.001).31inline with these data, rrs and os outcomes werenotably higher for nsclcs with z50% pd-l1expression treated with pembrolizumab in the key-note 001 and 010 trials.66,70several issues limit theinterpretability of these results. the rst ones areassay-related, as different antibodies or cutoff valueshave been used across clinical trials.62second, rrmight not be the ideal clinical end point to measurethe predictive capacity of anti /c0pd-1/l1 drugs. andthird, both pd-1/pd-l1 are upregulated uponinterferon (ifn)- release and are therefore induciblerather that tight molecular markers.28,62in this sense, pd-l1 might be overexpressed in 2different tumor contextures. first, aberrant oncogenicpathways may intrinsically lead to pd-l1 upregulation,table iv. potential predictive markers for pd-1/l1 blockade.biomarkers premisestudy firstauthorpd-l1 expression high pd-l1 expression might be correlated with better response rateand longer survival that absence of pd-l1 expression. however, somepd-l1/c0negative patients might still have durable responses and survivalbenets. assay-related inconsistencies and the fact that pd-l1 is aninducible marker that may vary according to tumor contextures limit theinterpretability of the results across clinical trials.fusi62genomiccomplexityhigh mutational burden has been shown to correlate with longeroverall survival as compared with low mutational burden. this has beenshown in carcinogen-induced tumors (melanoma, nsclc) and in tumorsdeveloped in a context of dna repair de ciency (colorectalcarcinoma with microsatellite instability). of note, mismatched de cientcolorectal carcinomas show higher tumor-in ltrating lymphocytes.importantly, in the case of nsclc, smokers tend to respond better thatnonsmokers, which is a paradigm shift as compared with oncogene-addictedlung adenocarcinomas, which are almost exclusive to nonsmokers.rizvi75le76snyder77*transcriptomicsignaturestype i interferon-based transcriptomic signatures might be associatedwith treatment bene ts. this has been recently shown in metastaticmelanoma but might be in principle applicable to other tumor types.ribas78tumor in ltratinglymphocytespre-existing cd8t cells distinctly located at the invasive tumor marginare associated with tumor regression upon pd-1/l1 blockade in metastaticmelanoma. importantly, using next-generation sequencingfor t-cell antigen receptors, in ltrating t cells were found to be clonal,suggesting a tumor-antigen /c0speci c t-cell responses, which, in turn,were inhibited by adaptive pd-l1 expression by tumor cellstumeh79nsclc non/c0small-cell lung cancer.*data for anti-ctla4 blockade.clinical therapeutics1562 volume 38 number 7

resulting in constitutive pd-l1 expression. and second,pd-l1 might be upregulated upon ifn- release as amechanism of adaptive tumor resistance against pre-existing anti-tumor immunity, re ecting immune rejec-tion.28,67one could argue that adaptive, rather thanconstitutive, pd-l1 expres sion might be a surrogatemarker for better outcomes with pd-1/l1 blockers.however, there is no clear explanation as to why someminority of pd-l1 /c0negative patients still obtain treat-ment responses. the complex interaction networks oft h ei m m u n es y s t e mc o u l de x p l a i nt h a t ,e v e ni nt h eabsence of pd-l1 expressi on, some antitumor immunitycould be reinstated upon pd-1/l1 blockade by theactivation of other pathways that could lead to tumorimmune rejection.62therefore, pd-l1 expression as-sessed by immunochemistry does not seem to satisfy allof the methodologic and biologic properties required tobecome the ideal biomarker. it is likely that establishingcommon testing criteria and better de ning which cells(tumor cells or immune in ltrates), localization (tumorbed or adjacent to immune in ltrates in the invasivemargins), or in what contexture pd-l1 is overexpressedwould improve its utility as a predictive marker. beyondpd-l1 expression, other promi sing biomarkers, includ-ing the pre-existence of tumor-in ltrating lymphocytes,high tumor mutational loads, or type i ifn-basedtranscriptomic signatures, have been reported to bepotential positive predictive markers for the bene to fthese drugs ( table iv ).28essentially, all of them aresurrogates of a common denominator, namely,immunogenicity (mutational burden) or anti-tumor im-munity (tumor-in ltrating lymphocytes, ifn signature)in a context of adaptive immune resistance ( figure 1 ). inthis sense, probably one of the most promisingbiomarkers for immunotherapy is measuring thegenomic contexture of the tumor. because somaticmutations have the potential to encode immunogenicneoantigens, tumor genomic pro ling might determinethe sensitivity not only to immune checkpoint inhibitors,but also for other promising i mmunotherapies. actually,genomic instability and high mutational load(neoantigens)cd8+ tilspd-l1 expressiontype i ifn dependent genescarcinogens dna repair deficiencyadaptive immune resistancefigure 1. surrogates of pre-existing immune activation and adaptive immune resistance as markers for thebenet of immune chelpoint inhibitors.j. zugazagoitia et al.july 2016 1563

engineered, tumor-antigen /c0specic adoptive t-celltherapies (t cells that express cloned t-cell receptorsor chimeric antigen receptors for speci c tumor antigensor epitopes) based on the speci cp a t i e n t s mutanome, isprobably one of the most promising strategy forprecision immunoncology.37,38conclusionsdespite major advances, the current approach to facecancer treatment is still reductionist. targeting singlemolecular abnormalities or cancer pathways hasachieved good clinical responses that have modestlyaffected survival in some cancers. however, targetinga single hallmark or pathway with a single drug(magic bullet ) will not likely lead to cancer cure.we predict that drug combinations against severalmolecular alterations or cancer hallmarks, in a waythat is similar to what we have done with hivtreatment, might be a promising therapeutic strategyto treat cancer in the near future. given the encourag-ing success of immunotherapy (particularly check-point inhibitors), pd-1/l1 blockade may constitute abasic pillar for these combinations. immunotherapiescould be combined either among each other(2 checkpoint inhibitors or a checkpoint inhibitor plusan immunostimulatory antibody) or with other anti-cancer agents (including targeted agents in oncogene-driven cancers). toxicity will be one of the keylimiting factors when implementing these combinationstrategies in the clinic, and early recognition andmanagement of adverse events will surely be a corecomponent for treatment success. ultimately, weevoke that personalized combination strategies ac-cording to pathways or hallmarks that speci callydrive each patients tumor biology within next-generation precision oncology initiatives will be oneof the main challenges and most promising strategiesfor cancer treatment in the future.conflicts of interestthe authors have indicated that they have no con ictsof interest regarding the content of this article.acknowledgmentsall the authors contributed in the writing and review-ing of the article.references1.ferlay j, soerjomataram i, dikshit r, et al. cancerincidence and mortality worldwide: sources, methodsand major patterns in globocan 2012. int j cancer .2015;136:e359 e386.2.ferlay j, steliarova-foucher e, lortet-tieulent j, et al. cancerincidence and mortality patterns in europe: estimates for 40countries in 2012. eur j cancer .2 0 1 3 ; 4 9 : 1 3 7 4 1403.3.schiller jh, harrington d, belani cp, et al. comparison offour chemotherapy regimens for advanced non-small-celllung cancer. n engl j med . 2002;346:92 98.4.roychowdhury s, chinnaiyan am. translating genomicsfor precision cancer medicine. annu rev genomics humgenet . 2014;15:395 415.5.simon r, roychowdhury s. implementing personalizedcancer genomics in clinical trials. nat rev drug discov .2013;12:358 369.6.paez jg, jnne pa, lee jc, et al. egfr mutations in lungcancer: correlation with clinical response to ge tinibtherapy. science . 2004;304:1497 1500.7.lynch tj, bell dw, sordella r, et al. activating mutationsin the epidermal growth factor receptor underlying re-sponsiveness of non-small-cell lung cancer to ge tinib.n engl j med . 2004;35:2129 2139.8.pao w, miller v, zakowski m, et al. egf receptor genemutations are common in lung cancers from never smokers and are associated with sensitivity of tumors to ge tinib anderlotinib. proc natl acad sci u s a . 2004;101:13306 13311.9.mok ts, wu y-l, thongprasert s, et al. ge tinib orcarboplatin-paclitaxel in pulmonary adenocarcinoma.n engl j med . 2009;361:947 957.10. mok t, yang j-j, lam k-c. treating patients with egfr-sensitizing mutations: rst line or second line is there adifference? j clin oncol . 2013;31:1081 1088.11.solomon bj, mok t, kim d-w, et al. first-line crizotinibversus chemotherapy in alk-positive lung cancer. n engl jmed. 2014;371:21672177.12.shaw at, ou s-hi, bang y-j, et al. crizotinib in ros1-rearranged non-small-cell lung cancer. n engl j med .2 0 1 4 ;371:1963 1971.13.morgensztern d, campo mj, dahlberg se, et al. molec-ularly targeted therapies in non small-cell lung cancerannual update 2014. j thorac oncol . 2015;10:s1 s63.14.kris mg, johnson be, berry ld, et al. using multiplexedassays of oncogenic drivers in lung cancers to selecttargeted drugs. jama . 2014;311:1998 2006.15.clinical lung cancer genome project (clcgp), networkgenomic medicine (ngm). a genomics-based classi cationof human lung tumors. sci transl med . 2013;5. 209ra153.16.arnedos m, soria j-c, andr f, tursz t. personalizedtreatments of cancer patients: a reality in daily practice, acostly dream or a shared vision of the future from theoncology community? cancer treat rev . 2014;40:1192 1198.clinical therapeutics1564 volume 38 number 7

17.sordella r, bell dw, haber da,settleman j. ge tinib-sensitizingegfr mutations in lung canceractivate anti-apoptotic pathways.science . 2004;305:1163 1167.18. hanahan d, weinberg ra.hallmarks of cancer: the next gen-eration. cell. 2011;144:646 674.19.jayson gc, kohn ec, kitchener hc,ledermann ja. ovarian cancer. lan-cet. 2014;384:1376 1388.20. ledermann j, harter p, gourley c,et al. olaparib maintenance ther-apy in patients with platinum-sensitive relapsed serous ovariancancer: a preplanned retrospectiveanalysis of outcomes by brca sta-tus in a randomised phase 2 trial.lancet oncol . 2014;15:852 861.21. schreiber rd, old lj, smyth mj.cancer immunoediting: integratingimmunity's roles in cancer suppres-sion and promotion. science .2 0 1 1 ;331:1565 1570.22. tartour e, zitvogel l. lung cancer:potential targets for immunotherapy.lancet respir med .2 0 1 3 ; 1 : 5 5 1 563.23. galon j, angell hk, bedognetti d,marincola fm. the continuum ofcancer immunosurveillance: prog-nostic, predictive, and mechanisticsignatures. immunity . 2013;39:11 26.24. chen ds, mellman i. oncology meetsimmunology: the cancer-immunitycycle. immunity . 2013;39:1 10.25. motz gt, coukos g. decipheringand reversing tumor immune sup-pression. immunity . 2013;39:61 73.26. pardoll dm. the blockade of im-mune checkpoints in cancer immu-notherapy. nat rev cancer .2 0 1 2 ;12:252 264.27. ribas a. releasing the brakes oncancer immunotherapy. n engl jmed. 2015;373:1490 1492.28. topalian sl, drake cg, pardolldm. immune checkpoint blockade:a common denominator approachto cancer therapy. cancer cell .2 0 1 5 ;27:450 461.29.homet moreno b, ribas a. anti-programmed cell death protein-1/ligand-1 therapy in differentcancers. br j cancer . 2015;112:1421 1427.30. brahmer j, reckamp kl, baas p,et al. nivolumab versus docetaxelin advanced squamous-cell non-small-cell lung cancer. n engl jmed. 2015;373:123 135.31.borghaei h, paz-ares l, horn l,et al. nivolumab versus docetaxelin advanced nonsquamous non-small-cell lung cancer. n engl jmed. 2015;373:1627 1639.32. galluzzi l, vacchelli e, bravo-sanpedro j-m, et al. classi cation ofcurrent anticancer immunotherapies.oncotarget . 2014;5:12472 12508.33. melero i, grimaldi am, perez-gracia jl, et al. clinical develop-ment of immunostimulatory mono-clonal antibodies and opportunitiesfor combination. clin cancer res .2013;19:997 1008.34. vansteenkiste jf, cho b, vanakesat, et al. magrit, a double-blind,randomized, placebo-controlledphase iii study to assess the ef cacyof the recmage-a3 as15 can-cer immunotherapeutic as adjuvanttherapy in patients with resectedmage-a3-positive non-small celllung cancer (nsclc) [abstract].ann oncol . 2014;25(suppl 4):iv409.35. butts c, socinski ma, mitchell pl,et al. tecemotide (l-blp25) versusplacebo after chemoradiotherapyfor stage iii non-small-cell lungcancer (start): a randomised,double-blind, phase 3 trial. lancetoncol . 2014;15:59 68.36. melero i, gaudernack g, gerritsenw, et al. therapeutic vaccines forcancer: an overview of clinical trials.nat rev clin oncol .2 0 1 4 ; 1 1 : 5 0 9 524.37. june ch, riddell sr, schumachertn. adoptive cellular therapy: arace to the nish line. sci translmed. 2015;7. 280ps7.38. rosenberg sa, restifo np. adoptivecell transfer as personalized immu-notherapy for human cancer.science . 2015;348:62 68.39. heuckmann jm, thomas rk. a newgeneration of cancer genomediagnostics for routine clinical use:overcoming the roadblocks to per-sonalized cancer medicine. ann on-col. 2015;26:1830 1837.40. gagan j, van allen em. next-generation sequencing to guide can-cer therapy. genome med . 2015;7:80.41.rodon j, saura c, dienstmann r,et al. molecular prescreening toselect patient population in earlyclinical trials. nat rev clin oncol .2012;;9:359 366.42. hollebecque a, massard c, soriaj-c. implementing precision medi-cine initiatives in the clinic: a newparadigm in drug development.curr opin oncol . 2014;26:340 346.43. andre f, mardis e, salm m, et al.prioritizing targets for precisioncancer medicine. ann oncol .2 0 1 4 ;25:2295 2303.44. dienstmann r, rodon j, taberneroj. optimal design of trials to dem-onstrate the utility of genomically-guided therapy: putting precisioncancer medicine to the test. moloncol . 2015;9:940 950.45. hyman dm, puzanov i, subbiah v,et al. vemurafenib in multiple non-melanoma cancers with braf v600mutations. n engl j med . 2015;373:726736.46. le tourneau c, delord j-p,gonalves a, et al. molecularlytargeted therapy based on tumourmolecular pro ling versus conven-tional therapy for advanced cancer(shiva): a multicentre, open-label, proof-of-concept, rando-mised, controlled phase 2 trial.lancet oncol . 2015;16:1324 1334.47. rodon j, soria j-c, berger r, et al.challenges in initiating and con-ducting personalized cancer therapytrials: perspectives from winther,a worldwide innovative network(win) consortium trial. ann oncol .2015;26:1791 1798.48. catenacci dvt. next-generationclinical trials: novel strategies toaddress the challenge of tumormolecular heterogeneity. mol oncol .2015;9:967 996.j. zugazagoitia et al.july 2016 1565

49. chaffer cl, weinberg ra. how doesmultistep tumorigenesis really pro-ceed? cancer discov . 2015;5:22 24.50. swanton c. intratumor heterogeneity:evolution through space and time.cancer res . 2012;72:4875 4882.51.gerlinger m, rowan aj, horswell s,et al. intratumor heterogeneity andbranched evolution revealed bymultiregion sequencing. n engl jmed. 2012;366:883 892.52. zhang j, fujimoto j, zhang j, et al.intratumor heterogeneity in localizedlung adenocarcinomas delineatedby multiregion sequencing. science .2014;346:256 259.53. camidge dr, pao w, sequist lv.acquired resistance to tkis in solidtumours: learning from lung cancer.nat rev clin oncol .2 0 1 4 ; 1 1 : 4 7 3 481.54. katayama r, shaw at, khan tm, et al.mechanisms of acquired crizotinib re-sistance in alk-rearranged lung can-cers. s c it r a n s lm e d . 2012;4. 120ra17.55. crystal as, shaw at, sequist lv,et al. patient-derived models ofacquired resistance can identify ef-fective drug combinations for can-cer. science . 2014;346:1480 1486.56. hugo w, shi h, sun l, et al. non-genomic and immune evolution ofmelanoma acquiring mapki resist-ance. cell. 2015;162:1271 1285.57. chong cr, jnne pa. the quest toovercome resistance to egfr-targeted therapies in cancer. natmed. 2013;19:1389 1400.58. jnne pa, yang jc-h, kim d-w,et al. azd9291 in egfr inhibitor-resistant non-small-cell lung cancer.n engl j med . 2015;372:1689 1699.59. sequist lv, soria j-c, goldman jw,et al. rociletinib in egfr-mutatednon-small-cell lung cancer. n engl jmed. 2015;372:1700 1709.60. wilson fh, johannessen cm, piccionif, et al. a functional landscape ofresistance to alk inhibition in lungcancer. cancer cell .2 0 1 5 ; 2 7 : 3 9 7 408.61.haber da, velculescu ve. blood-based analyses of cancer: circulatingtumor cells and circulating tumordna. cancer discov . 2014;4:650 661.62. fusi a, festino l, botti g, et al.pd-l1 expression as a potentialpredictive biomarker. lancet oncol .2015;16:1285 1287.63. weber js, d'angelo sp, minor d,et al. nivolumab versus chemother-apy in patients with advancedmelanoma who progressed afteranti-ctla-4 treatment (checkmate037): a randomised, controlled,open-label, phase 3 trial. lancetoncol . 2015;16:375 384.64. robert c, long gv, brady b, et al.nivolumab in previously untreatedmelanoma without braf mutation.n engl j med . 2015;372:320 330.65. motzer rj, escudier b, mcdermottdf, et al. nivolumab versus everolimusin advanced renal-cell carcinoma.ne n g ljm e d . 2015;373:1803 1813.66. garon eb, rizvi na, hui r, et al.pembrolizumab for the treatmentof non-small-cell lung cancer.n engl j med . 2015;372:2018 2028.67. ribas a. adaptive immune resistance:how cancer protects from immuneattack. cancer discov .2 0 1 5 ; 5 : 9 1 5 919.68. ribas a, puzanov i, dummer r,et al. pembrolizumab versusinvestigator-choice chemotherapyfor ipilimumabrefractory mela-noma (keynote-002): a rando-mised, controlled, phase 2 trial.lancet oncol . 2015;16:908 918.69. robert c, schachter j, long gv,et al. pembrolizumab versus ipili-mumab in advanced melanoma. nengl j med . 2015;372:2521 2532.70. herbst rs, baas p, kim dw, et al.pembrolizumab versus docetaxel forpreviously treated, pd-l1-positive,advanced non-small-cell lung can-cer (keynote-010): a randomisedcontrolled trial. lancet. dec 18, 2015[epub ahead of print].71. hodi fs, o'day sj, mcdermott df,et al. improved survival with ipili-mumab in patients with metastaticmelanoma. n engl j med . 2010;363:711723.72. robert c, thomas l, bondarenko i,et al. ipilimumab plus dacarbazine forpreviously untreated metastatic mela-noma. ne n g ljm e d . 2011;364:2517 2526.73. postow ma, chesney j, pavlick ac,et al. nivolumab and ipilimumab ver-sus ipilimumab in untreated mela-noma. ne n g ljm e d . 2015;372:2006 2017.74.larkin j, chiarion-sileni v, gonzalezr, et al. combined nivolumab andipilimumab or monotherapy in un-treated melanoma. ne n g ljm e d .2 0 1 5 ;373:23 34.75.rizvi na, hellmann md, snyder a,et al. cancer immunology. mutationallandscape determines sensitivity topd-1 blockade in non-small cell lungcancer. science . 2015;348:124 128.76.le dt, uram jn, wang h, et al.pd-1 blockade in tumors withmismatch-repair de ciency. n englj med . 2015;372:2509 2520.77. snyder a, makarov v, merghoub t,et al. genetic basis for clinical responseto ctla-4 blockade in melanoma.ne n g ljm e d . 2014;371:2189 2199.78. ribas a, robert c, hodi fs, et al.association of response to pro-grammed death receptor 1 (pd-1)blockade with pembrolizumab (mk-3475) with an interferon-in ammatoryimmune gene signature [abstract].j clin oncol . 2015;33(suppl):3001.79. tumeh pc, harview cl, yearley jh,et al. pd- 1 blockade induces re-sponses by inhibiting adaptive im-mune resistance. nature . 2014;515:568571.address correspondence to : luis paz-ares, md, phd, medical oncologydepartment, hospital universitario 12 de octubre, avenida de crdoba,s/n, 28041, madrid, spain. e-mail: lpazaresr@seom.orgclinical therapeutics1566 volume 38 number 7